[Music]
so I'm really thrilled and honored to
have commander Ishita here with us if
you did not see the more mother
performance last night you really missed
out it was it was something special and
pretty incredible and they have together
they've been developing and discussing
their creative practice called black
quantum futurism which I I saw talk at
transmedia that you gave I think in a
and is really one of the most unique and
exciting conceptions of being a creative
practitioner that I've seen in quite
some time so please thank you so much
glad to have them here hi everybody
thanks for having us my name is Martita
is Khmer and came or mother would go by
black box teacher ISM we do works in
Philadelphia we do a lot of
multidisciplinary interdisciplinary art
we write we create sound scapes
[Music]
visual art but we also combine that with
what's called activism but for us it's
really just everyday living being in our
community and working with our community
so we also have a space in Philly called
Community Futures lab where we're doing
oral histories and providing resources
to a distressed neighborhood in Philly
that's undergoing mass displacement of
poor folks mostly black and brown folks
so we do that as well we do a number of
other things I'm a housing attorney as
well by day so tonight we're going to
just kind of give you some snippets of
our practice and our theory and hope you
enjoy we also have some looks up here
for sale and we'll also open it up for
questions at the end of our meeting
thank you
[Music]
time travel experiment number one
recall a memory then get inside of the
memory to actually experience it not
just a flash or image but build up the
theme of the memory like a play set and
step on to the stage describe the memory
from the perspective of their other
objects in the room too
[Music]
pay attention to thoughts that you have
and order them in terms of their
relation to the past present or future
for example if you have a thought about
something you plan to do tomorrow order
that into the future if you have a
memory of the past order that into the
past if you have a present sensation
such as a thought about a current
surrounding or feeling of this comfort
place that thought into the present
category three
as you categorize these thoughts notice
where you place the future thought has
cause and present thought and your
imagination are the past thoughts behind
you and the future thoughts in front of
you take a thought from either one of
these categories and reverse the
direction if it is a path loss for
example reverse to God so that you see
in front of you or thought about the
future reverse reverse it so that you
see the thoughts behind you
[Music]
form take one of the future sauce that
you have reversed and build up a memory
of it just like you did with the past
memory in exercise one place your
consciousness inside of the future
memory two experiences take one of the
past memories that you have reversed and
walk into it as if it is unfamiliar as
if you are experiencing it for the first
time
[Music]
where is the master clock who watches it
and who keeps time if the master clock
stops the time stops most people take
their everyday experiences of time as a
factual unalterable facets of reality
there are clocks that chart the hours
minutes and seconds calendars that chart
the march of days months and years Suns
planets and stars that chart the ages
mapping out cosmic times but more subtle
however are the ways in which time
governs our social interactions
regulates our motions and our movements
frames our worldviews informs our
politics and leaks into our very
consciousness
the ways in which we are situated in
time are reflected in how we talk about
think about and conceptualize the world
around us in America and many other
places natural time has been overthrown
by Western linear time where temporal
orientation is facilitated by clocks
schedule cell phones and digital
calendars
[Music]
the word future by definition designates
a time period or temporal space that is
not now one that is situated ahead or
before us and that is distinctive from
time that lie behind or before the one
we are situated in etymologically future
developed out of old French future
during the late 14th century meaning a
time after the present or that which is
yet to be future can be further traced
back to the Latin futurists be is a
femme few to grow or to become which is
the future participle of the word essay
or to be the Oxford Dictionary notes
that both essay in the future share be
at their root which may explain why the
word be form can both denotes an event
that has already passed and is now in
the past or an events that has not yet
happened
notions of the future at that which lies
ahead very greatly in traditional
indigenous African spatio-temporal
consciousness for example time was
experienced as a matter of pacing akin
to walking with the time beginning when
you arrive at your destination African
time has also been said to have a
backwards linearity and that when events
occur they immediately move backwards
towards what John and BP called Zamani
time or macro time future events are
situated in potential time until
experience or actualize those events do
not depend on a specific clock time or
calendar dates for their manifestation
instead time depends on the quality of
the event and the person experiencing it
once the future event is determined and
experienced it instantaneously moves
backwards into the present and the past
dimensions those two dimensions they're
the most ontological significance where
a person experienced his time partly in
his own individual life and partly
through this society which goes back
many generations before his own birth
in contrast a traditional European
spatial temporal consciousness around
that and prior to the 14th century saw
time as slow and inevitability early
recordings of an abstract sense of time
as a continuous duration arose during
the 14th century while the word time
itself derives from the word tied or
kitted which has its etymological roots
and a Sanskrit word for division to cut
up or to flood as in the time of high
water
within the European judeo-christian
religious order work and prayer times
who are heavily regulated by law because
of a belief in biblical apocalyptic
visions of the end being near time had
to be tightly regulated and time war
Jeremy Rifkin notes that Western culture
has institutionalized its images of the
future by way of religion and politics
making sure that the future can be made
predictable and controlled it is through
religion and politics that a linear
temporal orientation the first came to
be discerned simultaneous to the
development of Western culture the
structure of time eventually came to be
organized discreetly and causally into a
past present and future with fixed
events set against a forward moving
timeline one that would eventually come
to a climatic chaotic end
this progressive future one that is
unidirectional and that does not allow
access to the past with further forge
through other significant events in
science and technology scholar Doron van
Rossum notes only since the Scientific
Revolution revolution in the middle of
the 17th century can one speak of
experimentally qualifying scientific
procedures and conceptions of time as a
scaled continuum of discrete moments the
increased building and usage of public
clocks and eventually personal watches
and timepieces further inscribe the
mechanical order of time impacting all
aspects of the Western Way of life the
second law thermodynamics developed
around 1854 also reinforced the linear
notion of time speeding into the future
toward a chaotic end while other
significant temporal historical events
such as the building of the first
long-distance railroads and the
invention of the telegram allow the
future to be conquered through a
compression of space-time
British Foreign Minister Lord Rosen very
noted for example in 1839 that the
motivation is for colonizing Africa is
not about the presence not about what we
want right now but what we shall want in
a future Rosebery considered the future
as something to be mind acknowledging
the metaphor by stating that they were
engaged in the business of pegging out
claims for the future considering he and
his fellow and perilous trustees to the
future of his race
[Music]
many of the radical movements both
during and after slavery actively took
on the language of the future and
seeking to empower people to rise above
their present circumstances for radicals
in a struggle for freedom from racial
oppression the future offered a
potential source of hope in 1892
abolitionists and former slave Frederick
Douglas told a group of black students
at Atlanta University be not discouraged
there is a future for you and a future
for me
however on the other hand in the speech
delivered on July 4th 1854 he observed
that America is false to its past
false to its present and solemnly binds
itself to be false to the future Marcus
Garvey founder of the universal Negro
Improvement Association found history to
be a hoax or three courser for the
future one that was subject to the
creative forces of the oppressed he told
his followers we have a beautiful future
we have a beautiful history and we shall
create another in the future that will
Spanish the world at the turn of the
century and I want garde Italian social
movement known as futurism attempted to
revolutionize Andry appropriate notions
of the future in art architecture
literature and culture believing that
the pulse of reverence to the past and
tradition should die they created
manifestos artwork music and critical
theory around the future rapidly
speeding toward them much like
Einstein's relativistic future the
future had run into now whereas Filippo
Marinette II wrote in manifesto on
futurism in 1909 time and space died
yesterday
notions of the future have virtually
defined the genre of modern-day science
fiction these future visions began these
future visions began to take on a
dystopian tone following the Victoria
era of wonder space travel and high-tech
HG well spent much of his career time
traffic into dystopian futures through
fiction essays and speeches while George
Orwell's novel 1984 and 1950 famously
warned that who controls the past
controls the future who controls the
present controls the past real-life
science technology has benefited from
the imagination of science fiction as
much as the reverse many sci-fi writers
are in fact sciences
four contacted by scientists when their
work predicts the future or things up
new possibilities and uses for
technology but the inevitable
consequence of the rapidly changing
future envisioned by the Italian
futurists and the ones illustrated by
science fiction is what Alvin Toffler
called future shocks in 1970 to describe
the shattering stress and disorientation
that we induce in the individual by
subjecting them to too much change in
too short of a time he believed that the
greatly accelerated rate of social and
technological change in our society
produced mostly negative personal and
psychological consequences arising from
the superimposition of a new culture
upon an old one producing a form of
culture shock from which the victims can
never recover but this is what Marinette
ii and the italian futurist wish for
a future now one permanently sips from
the past brought about by a violence
expansion of the scope of change the
term future shop itself spread from
popular culture theory and media Curtis
Mayfield had a song called Future Shop
on his album which was in turn covered
by Herbie Hancock as the title track for
his 1983 recording a jazz funk
electronic fusion that was considered
futuristic for its time Future Shop as
described by Mayfield the world of
poverty drugs addiction hunger
desperation tf1 while we understand this
is our last and only chance everybody
it's a future shock this words hearkened
to use of a presences of time
orientation the dark side of the future
is now this represents how oppressed
people today particularly the
descendants of enslaved Africans embody
temporal tensions at this unity between
cultural notions of time and space
little analyze are two ways in which
because temporarily a presence is
emporium tation is connected to class
poverty oppression racism and the legacy
of slavery maintaining a sense of
presence ISM / a sense of futurism has
also been both with the sentence
mechanism against black communal trauma
and post trauma under the conditions of
class warfare and racial oppression
deriving from slavery and marketing back
to a more natural ancestral temporal
spatial consciousness
for example Michelle and right causes
that if we use the linear progress
narrative to connect the African
continent to the Middle Passage black
today we've run into a logical problem
because our time lines move through
geography chronologically with
enslavement taking place at the
beginning or in the past and the march
towards freedom moving through the ages
toward the far right end of line or
arrow which also represents the presence
additionally ripken explains the
consequence of the linear progress
narrative being applied to an oppressed
people keep them confined in a narrow
central band unable to anticipate and
plan for their own futures powerless to
affect their own political faith for
those deprived of access to the future
the future becomes untrustworthy
unpredictable they become stuck only
being able to plan for the present and
limited time in the future as the
society around them speeds forward an
illusory
linear progress this narrow temporal ban
is used to penalize people on a daily
basis being 10 minutes late to court for
example can be losing your kids your job
your home your freedom your life
[Music]
hierarchies of time and lack of access
to the future informs intergenerational
poverty in the same way that wealth
passes down between generations and
traditionally privileged families time
is a commodity woman and feminist
movements have also featured the future
prominently bright notes examples of
black women as writers such as Octavia
Butler and Alice Walker who create bold
new models for a self-defined
or internally defined notion of time the
time-traveling black woman protagonists
Dana and Butler's fantasy novel kindred
for example has to ensure the
continuation of her family time her
family's timeline in the antebellum
South and by extension her own birth
hundreds of years into the future how do
we begin to map our return to our own
futures one way that radicals today can
more affirmatively claim or create the
future is by actively engaging
temporalities and about seeing
alternative temporal orientations and
frameworks which in turn help to shift
the meanings or placement of the future
as well as shifting the means of access
to that future the new time revels
advocate a radically different approach
to temporality
[Music]
interrelated the concept and community
of afrofuturism has emerged over the
last 20 years and has developed as a
tool medium and lens that black
marginalized communities across the
Diaspora can use to evaluate or shape
our own futures our curator and
afro-futurist and mayoral candidate
angry at Lafleur describes afrofuturism
as a way of imagining possible futures
through a black cultural lens while
professor and artist Eden egg a up ten
calls it an exploration and methodology
of liberation simultaneously both
locations and the journey afrofuturism
lends itself well to exploring notions
of institutional liberation unearthing
our true history mapping our futures
understanding our present conditions in
the flow of time and through a
speculative lens because it provides a
perpetual bridge between the past
present and future
afrofuturism and the black speculative
imagination can be used as liberation
technologies to free us sometime
[Music]
how do we participate
building time
[Music]
water
like memory
[Music]
and we can't because
we'll see I want to build my
I loved everything kissing and Meg
around how to use a club today
most
[Music]
and you there
never seems to be working always minute
or quarter till minute and instances
here in the appear which needs check
[Music]
let's see
apparently
[Music]
an institution that is Western science
was born of the politics of the 17th
century bifurcating itself as a practice
and institution of empirical fault
separate and distinct from philosophical
salt it is essential to note that the
scientific institutions development
coincided with the emergence of the
transatlantic enslavement system its
development was also attacked
significantly by the Roman Inquisition
the Inquisition had confessed Galileo
through teaching that year moon they
correlate publishing and likely to
philosophical theories on heliocentrism
due to the Inquisition of belief in the
earth as the center of the universe
Newton conducted his experiments and
efforts improved a part on and many of
his series as well to stand the test of
time
whose all scientific history is
convoluted in the realm of
thermodynamics of relativity science is
the ultimate political body the my box
with the door'll isn't that persistence
in present parts of reason why classical
physics and Fox Business seemingly
contradicted blinded by its own
so-called enlightenment and the sweet
settings light dorms as an opportunist
eternal yet aside of the cascading
chaotic universe science is really the
results and end of a negotiation the law
of various goal to be commonly true
about the world and the universe were
all shaped by the hands of a privileged
few traditional side by a more
imaginative retelling of science history
and an anticipation of its trajectory
steeped in a dark age from which emerged
reinforcing the narratives of white
superiority
because we don't science fiction to be
social commentary on the evolution of
society the use of terrible it is easy
to see where the line splits between the
science of the haves and have-nots and
thusly with the line splits between
traditional and DIY by five people of
the edges the intersection the margins
of society can no longer continue to
rectify our lack of representation in
our lack of survivors in traditional
science fiction world no longer
computers we are here we are many we are
political
we are political because skin color is
political because body parts are too
little clear because gender is local
because who you might [__] is too little
cool because freezing clean air because
drinking clean water is political
[Music]
and in order to disavow that to little
cool and challenge the two little head
to break down the political
you must first understand how it already
has you to find out of stuff of the
crumbling institutions of science
divorce from imagination what they call
the hyphenated science-fiction come
science speculative possibility in the
form of Metro Clary a new science for
new world of our own shaping here with
science less in our care the
thermodynamic arrow she's out into all
possible directions here there is no
difference between the experimental and
the theoretical science fiction is dying
remnants of the old ways of living we
are Sciences proposes to imagination for
happy lifelong union we are on people's
things
[Music]
what is retro causality place we're in
the past was the lane now all dried up
dark clouds hover above the president
can affect the past I've been done to be
caught in a vortex of digging space
between matter and I was never there I
[Music]
was never [__] there and it all makes
sense like the whole thing was a mirage
just be talking to myself
spell that I was working on I'm done
with that now no more
[Music]
predictive coding hashtag pattern
physics
hashtag speculative science hashtag
experimental versus to perceive the
world is to anticipated automatic semele
brainwave stored knowledge about the
world and the probability of one state
of events following another to generate
prediction the Darwinism
what we perceive is determined by what
we know vice versa feedback thinks type
action exists to validate our
predictions against it there is no year
there is no history there is no past
there are mostly story everything we
think we know it's just a mean song we
can never get out of source everything
is a building metaphor we define
phenomenon by metaphor because essence
is only expressed in terms that we
cannot observe or articulate we can
never get at what a thing is in and of
itself it's unsourced its own existence
on its own terms without reference to
some other thing something outside of
the thing itself given meaning to give
it contrast to give it definition
[Music]
but even these words abstract the notion
all things are attracted in carbonyl we
build more metaphors into language or
photography old wine the metaphor word
help like stock like self-perpetuating
self-references self-replenishing and
its own origin memory the creation of
language literally hyperbole hyper
equals beyond follow mean to throw a
metaphor meta is over and a fault there
any miss to charity or to there who take
practically action words until metaphor
topic metaphor praying things in and out
branching off until the metaphor becomes
the thing ourselves
language builds up the world and images
it makes things interchangeable with
actions and it allows action to
hi-dee-hi language you are activating
energy of the act embedded in the world
without actually carrying out the
physical action language sets us up for
phantom actions which is why the
question of what may have more action or
words this moot because words are
actions taken literally one stripped
bare of itself
etymology which is why word magic is the
shortcut to reality alteration
[Music]
[Laughter]
you